TEXTS ADOPTED
Temporary trade-liberalisation measures supplementing trade concessions applicable to Ukrainian products under the EU/Euratom/Ukraine Association Agreement
Committee on International Trade
European Parliament legislative resolution of 23 April 2024 on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on temporary trade-liberalisation measures supplementing trade concessions applicable to Ukrainian products under the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part (COM(2024)0050 – C9-0021/2024 – 2024/0028(COD))
(Ordinary legislative procedure: first reading)
The European Parliament,
– having regard to the Commission proposal to Parliament and the Council (COM(2024)0050),
– having regard to Article 294(2) and Article 207(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, pursuant to which the Commission submitted the proposal to Parliament (C9-0021/2024),
– having regard to Article 294(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
– having regard to the provisional agreement approved by the committee responsible under Rule 74(4) of its Rules of Procedure and the undertaking given by the Council representative by letter of 8 April 2024 to approve Parliament’s position, in accordance with Article 294(4) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
– having regard to Rule 59 of its Rules of Procedure,
– having regard to the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development,
– having regard to the report of the Committee on International Trade (A9-0077/2024),
1. Adopts its position at first reading hereinafter set out;
2. Takes note of the statements by the Commission annexed to this resolution, which will be published in the C series of the Official Journal of the European Union;
3. Calls on the Commission to refer the matter to Parliament again if it replaces, substantially amends or intends to substantially amend its proposal;
4. Instructs its President to forward its position to the Council, the Commission and the national parliaments.
P9_TC1-COD(2024)0028
Position of the European Parliament adopted at first reading on 23 April 2024 with a view to the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2024/… of the European Parliament and of the Council on temporary trade-liberalisation measures supplementing trade concessions applicable to Ukrainian products under the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part
(As an agreement was reached between Parliament and Council, Parliament's position corresponds to the final legislative act, Regulation (EU) 2024/1392.)
ANNEX TO THE LEGISLATIVE RESOLUTION
Statement by the Commission on the monitoring of imports of grain from Ukraine on the occasion of the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2024/1392
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has disrupted pre-existing supply chains. The EU is providing support to Ukraine to resume normal flow of grain and other goods, especially through the Solidarity Lanes, and to ensure that exports of grain can reach their destination, including in particular in third markets, to support global food security.
The Commission is committed to supporting Ukraine while also preserving the interest of the EU grain producers and ensuring a proper functioning of the grain market in the EU.
Given the importance of grain production and grain markets, the Commission will pay particular attention to the monitoring of imports of grain, in particular wheat, and notably to the concentration of such imports in Member States neighbouring Ukraine. In its regular dialogue with Ukraine, the Commission will address any issues brought to light by the monitoring. The Commission recalls that imports from Ukraine can be subject to surveillance under Chapter IV of Regulation (EU) 2015/478 of the European Parliament and the Council of 11 March 2015 on common rules for imports, which can take the form of import licensing, if the trend in imports threatens to cause injury to Union producers and if the interests of the Union so require. In this regard, the Commission will use the tools at its disposal as needed. The Commission will continue to report regularly to Member States on the results of the regular dialogue with Ukraine.
For products covered by ATMs, the Commission recalls that the Regulation also provides for a reinforced safeguard mechanism. For the first time, the Commission has introduced the possibility and is ready to activate this mechanism in the event of adverse effects on the market of one or several Member States and not only for the EU market as a whole. In this regard, the Commission will use to the full extent its powers to initiate ex officio the reinforced safeguard mechanism for imports of wheat from Ukraine. 
The Commission recalls that, in 2022 and 2023, it adopted measures to support European farmers in all Member States, notably in the Member States neighbouring Ukraine.
Statement by the Commission on the Review Process under Article 29 of the Association Agreement on the occasion of the adoption of Regulation (EU) 2024/1392
The Commission confirms that, as soon as the new ATMs are adopted by the co-legislators, it will take the necessary steps under Article 29 of the Association Agreement to pursue, through consultations with Ukraine, the process of reciprocal tariff liberalisation.
The Commission will closely involve the European Parliament and will keep it informed of the progress of those consultations with Ukraine. The Commission will take due account of possible comments of the European Parliament in that respect.
The Commission recalls that these working modalities do not constitute a precedent for review clauses in any other agreement and do not deviate from Article 218 TFEU.
The outcome of this process will provide economic certainty and stable trade to both Ukraine and the EU, to farmers and businesses. This will also be an important step in the reconstruction of Ukraine and further integration into the EU internal market, as part of the country’s future accession to the Union.